Rinie (00:00)
Hello and welcome to another episode of the Modern Indian Parent Podcast, the podcast that is redefining parenting in Indian families. I am Rinie Gupta. I'm a pediatric sleep consultant. And every week we bring you episodes that allow you to own your modern parenting choices, even if nani and dadi don't agree with them.

Today we have a very special guest with us, Dr. Vivek Jogani He's a pediatric dentist from Mumbai who specializes in preventive care. in the last 15 years, he has treated thousands of kids to give them their beautiful smiles. And he's loved by the children as well as their parents.

In today's episode, we're going to be asking Dr. Jogani all the questions that we as parents are constantly wondering about when it comes to our child's dental care. When to brush, how to brush, what toothpaste to use. These are the basics of dental care we'll be covering. On top of that, we'll be discussing about the impact of using baby bottles, pacifiers, thumb sucking and so much more. And trust me, every piece of information from Dr. Jogani is going to be a golden nugget that's going to make you feel like wow.

I know so much more about taking care of my child's teeth now. So let's dive right in and welcome Dr. Jogani to get this episode started.

Rinie  (01:12)
hello, welcome Dr. Jogani. I'm so happy to have you here. How are you doing today?

Dr. Vivek Jogani (01:17)
Hi Rini, thank you so much for inviting me today. I'm good.

Rinie  (01:20)
Very happy to have you here. And you know, before we get into so many questions that I have gotten through Instagram about the doubts that parents have and what they wanna learn about their child's dental care and pacifiers and this and that, I just wanna know firstly, how did you make your way into pediatric dentistry?

Dr. Vivek Jogani (01:40)
Well, for every individual after doing dentistry, it's either a choice or a chance. For me, it was a choice. My birthday falls on 14th of November. And that's not the reason for taking a pediatrics. I thought of selecting orthodontics. But it was just a minute away on finalizing.

I don't know something clicked and it just happened to be pediatric dentistry. Yeah, so having been practicing pediatric dentistry for more than 15 years now, it's more of a choice than a chance.

Rinie  (02:13)
but do you feel like you made the right choice now?

Dr. Vivek Jogani (02:16)
Absolutely. No second thoughts on it. I'm really happy. In fact, I enjoy working with kids. I enjoy working on kids with special health care needs. any friend or relative asking, would you like to treat me? No, I just want my kids.

Rinie  (02:29)
That is so sweet. I have seen pictures of kids coming into your clinic and they get these little stars that you give them. That is such a sweet thing. Like, I'm like, I wish I had a dentist like this when I was growing

Dr. Vivek Jogani (02:35)
Yeah.

So usually kids when they come they all like stickers and most of the clinics use the concept of stickers, smileys. So we have stars, have smileys made and we make them the stars rather than sticking the stickers on their palms, you know. They're quite happy. There was one child recently who said I want the big star which makes me a star, I don't want the sticker. So the parent was like quite amazed that how did my child figure that out because this

that is usually lying in one of the play areas of the kids playing corner

Rinie  (03:13)
That is so sweet. And you know what, I've got a three and a half year old and I know that she dreads doctor visits, like especially when she was getting vaccinations and stuff. We just kept on thinking, how do we get her to be more comfortable to go to a doctor and to a dentist? when, you know, she doesn't even let us access her mouth and brush her teeth. How would she let this totally unknown person do it?

Dr. Vivek Jogani (03:36)
So it's basically preparing the child at the right time in a right fashion in a right manner. Never ever introduce the pediatric dentist as a doctor or a dentist who's gonna be you know examining you be very judicious be very easy with the words that you use. Introduce your pediatric dentist as you know you're going to a tooth friend who's going to check all the teeth count how many teeth we have now and he's gonna keep a check record of how many teeth are still going to come.

and you you could also introduce a pediatric dentist as someone who is related to a tooth fairy. Tooth fairy usually comes only after taking an assignment from a pediatric dentist that should I go and give the child something or not and cook up stories the first dental visit is very important don't make a hush hush appointment with your dentist.

See to it that the timing of your visiting your dentist is very easy time for your child. Prefer a morning hours when the child is quite fresh and lively, active rather than taking in an evening slot wherein kids are totally drained out after their full day activity.

in fact never ever insist on dental treatment in the first visit itself let it be only a visit which you know the child explores the dental clinic understands and relates to the pediatric dentist

spend some time in the clinic

then whatever needed appointment is whether it's a filling, cleaning, fluoride, root canal extraction or whatever that can be scheduled from the second visit so that the second time when the child enters he is not novice to the environment he does not feel that he's coming to a new place you know he has that comfort that you know I'm going to get a balloon

going to get a sticker, there's a play area in one corner, he's identified his favorite corner, favorite toy in the clinic. most of the pediatric dental clinics are built in such a way that first and foremost is to make friendship with the child, bring down the anxiety.

and then you go ahead with whatever treatment is necessary.

Rinie  (05:38)
Amazing and you you mentioned the first dental visit is there a certain timeline where it should be or should you go in When you see a problem

Dr. Vivek Jogani (05:44)
know I'm really glad you took up this that when should you visit a pediatric dentist. This is very important for parents to know because usually parents have a tendency that today what we see is need-based pediatric dental practice wherein if a child is having pain or the child is having some kind of discomfort bleeding gums and then you rush to a dentist.

the first pediatric dental visit should be immediately after the first tooth that has erupted and not later than the first birthday.

So basically the pediatric dentists are nothing but the pediatricians for your oral cavity. So very often parents visit the pediatricians for assessment of the growth and development, the height, the weight, vaccinations. And there is a routine chart wherein six monthly or annual basis you visit. Similarly, so as I just mentioned, if you have seen the first tooth erupting into the oral cavity, it's time to schedule a visit. And if you haven't, then maybe by the first birthday.

and that makes a rotational pattern that every year on the birthday month you can visit a pediatric dentist. So in this format you don't even forget visiting for your child's dental visit and You need not go on the same day of your birthday, you can go anytime during that month.

Rinie  (07:07)
amazing. I'm thinking back to the time when my kid had like two teeth, right, they were tiny. I myself as a parent was wondering what would we do in that dental visit? Like why should we make the effort to go all the way when there's only two tiny teeth in the mouth? Like what is the procedure of the first dental visit? What does it look like?

Dr. Vivek Jogani (07:24)
Okay, it's just a routine examination to assess whether the gum pads are normal, the eruption pattern is normal, the tooth erupting is normal. And when you visit with those two tiny teeth, you get home a lot of insights as to how to take care of them. So only when you visit at the first sign of tooth eruption or by the first birthday, you can get more information from where and how you have to start taking care of it. It's like right from choosing your toothpaste.

What kind of a toothpaste it should be, whether it should be a fluoridated or a non-fluoridated toothpaste. What kind of toothbrush should you introduce so that it becomes an easy access and the child accepts in a fun way. He loves to brush rather than forcing the kids brushing onto the teeth.

Rinie  (08:07)
Yes, my god, feel like that is information that we have to go for because all of us, I think I'm telling universally, including myself, we have struggled so much with teeth brushing and just all these questions about like, you know, you're standing in a supermarket aisle with like 30 options for kids toothbrushes and kids toothpaste and you're like, which one do I pick? Should I get the one with the xylitol, which is this new thing? was like, that looks, that sounds like a preservative. Like, I don't know if I should be getting that.

Or should I get the fluoridated one? So how about we clarify this, you know, for all the parents watching this. Let's talk about what are the necessary products that we need for dental care from birth, even when they don't have teeth.

Dr. Vivek Jogani (08:48)
Yeah, so the oral hygiene starts immediately after birth. It does not start after you start having teeth So when the baby is born and you start feeding and nursing the baby until six months of age, the child is exclusively on milk. So you have to clean the gum pads of the milk after every feed. So what you can do is you can use a thin muslin cloth

is readily available at anyone's home or you can get this kind of gauze wipes which are available at your nearest chemist. So these gauze wipes are nothing but you know they are use and throw so it becomes hygienic. You can wet them, wrap it around your finger and just move it around the gumpads of the child after every feed. So this will take away all the foul smell forming in the child's mouth, the haly tosses, the bad breath that we usually often call for.

of milk if any there in the child's oral cavity that is taken off Then when you have one to four teeth you can introduce a finger brush. It's a small silicon brush which you can wrap it around your finger. You know just have to wear it and it has tiny bristle strokes so you can just clean it very well and that's very most of the kids are comfortable with that. It usually helps in massaging the gums as well.

So many a times what happens is if you don't introduce those kind of silicon brushes and immediately jump onto the regular toothbrushes, it gets really difficult. You have to desensitize the child as well or something when introduced into the oral cavity. So a finger brush worn on the finger, silicon brush, they're very easily available with most of the leading brands. And it's fine to see to it that they are PBA free, lead free.

and you're good to go ahead with it for initial 2 to 4 teeth max 6 teeth. Now, after the child would have had 6 teeth into the oral cavity, you can introduce a regular toothbrush, but mind you that the size of the toothbrush is very important. Whatever toothbrush you select, it should have a long handle and a short head size, not the other way around. know, a lot of products are marketed wherein they show, you know,

good thickness or good width of the bristles but we don't want that because the longer the head it wouldn't reach on the back molars and the cheek areas and then it gets really irritating for the child to brush with those. So see to it that it's a long handle with a small head size so that the ease of access of reaching onto the last tooth gets very easy.

now there's something called as electronic toothbrushes also and they are a must get for every child. You can introduce them at four years of age. lot of parents have this jiggle that why an electronic toothbrush? Well, electronic toothbrushes have many functions apart from just cleaning. So because of the vibrations, it helps in desensitization.

You know, there are sensory integration programs that we run for children with special health care needs, primarily autism, ADHD, hyperactive kids, and even Down syndrome. So these are the kids who do not find any foreign body easy into the oral cavity. They are even picky eaters, they have a texture preference, so let alone brushing, eating gets difficult for them. So an electronic toothbrush can help them desensitize. You know, it activates the nerve fibers in the tongue.

It also helps in speech development and more importantly because of the vibrations, the sonic vibrations that are created in that electronic toothbrush, it helps in preventing the colonization of the plaque. So whenever a plaque is formed, over a period of time, a plaque gets converted into calculi and this calculi happens only when the tartar or the plaque is not removed on a daily basis.

it gets difficult to remove even by brushing and that's scaling, is full mouth cleaning, oral prophylaxis or professional brushing that has to be done by a dentist comes into picture. So if you have to avoid that, an electronic toothbrush definitely helps prevention of plaque formation or accumulation and colonization of the tartar and then forming into the calculus.

So an electronic toothbrush you can definitely introduce anywhere around 3 to 4 years of age. Now those kids who undergo certain dental procedures like you know some of them may have braces or some of them may have some appliance for mouth breathing or thumb sucking or tongue thrusting or anything. For them you have you know different design ortho brushes readily available.

These brushes easily get access into this wire components and you can maintain very good hygiene with them.

Rinie  (13:45)
thank you for telling us all these diverse brushes that we need to be getting at different stages of life. But could you guide us through how to select one? Because when you go into the supermarket, there are just 30 of them and you don't know which one to pick out. How would you go about selecting the best brush for your kid?

Dr. Vivek Jogani (13:58)
Well,

Well, you can pick up any brand toothbrush that does not matter. All the brands are more or less the same. What you have to know is the technicalities involved in selecting a toothbrush. So any brush that you select, it should have a long handle such that it gives an easy grip to the child. At times you can take different designs of toothbrushes as well so that the child can rest the thumb and understand how to brush. So any brush, just a

good length of the toothbrush handle, the shortest head size available in your supermarket. so that it has an easy access of reaching the last molar. Also you don't traumatize the child while forceful brushing at times or you are brushing the child and you know you don't realize that

it's hurting him and the child is retaliating that's because the size is not perfect. If you select the correct size any child will allow and enjoy brushing. The second most important aspect is the type of bristles that are to be used. You need to use a soft bristle or an ultra soft bristles. Let me be very clear

whether it's an adult or a pediatric practice, never use medium or hard toothbrush because you're not cleaning utensils, you're cleaning human tissues. So let's respect the human tissues. You're brushing two times a day, 365 days, all through the year and a couple of years. And when you're in your 30s, you start complaining of sensitivity, wearing of the tooth, facets, tooth abrasion, ablation, and whatnot.

That's because you have not used the correct type of a toothbrush. So an ultra soft and a soft toothbrush can work can definitely help you.

Rinie  (15:44)
I need to go throw out my kids toothbrush right now because I'm pretty sure those are medium hard bristles and my goodness, so much I'm learning today. let's talk about the toothpaste. So now that we know the right toothbrush to get, at what stage do we use which toothpaste for our child?

Dr. Vivek Jogani (16:01)
Well, what type of toothpaste to use and how much to use is a major concern which every mummy coming to a clinic has this common query and this really needs to be addressed at mass level. So when the baby is under two years of age and only couple of teeth are there, then the amount of toothpaste that you take is a non-fluoridated toothpaste but a rice grain size.

Once the baby is 2 plus then you can start using a smear of a toothpaste Once the child is around 3 plus then you can use half a peanut size of a toothpaste and there you introduce a fluoridated toothpaste. Once the child is 6 plus you use a fluoridated toothpaste but a pea size amount.

The quantity of toothpaste that has been used by the child is very important whether it is a fluoridated toothpaste or a non-fluoridated toothpaste.

Rinie  (17:00)
Actually Dr. Jogani, just want to clarify this well because the debate between fluoridated and non-fluoridated toothpaste, it's like all over Instagram, they say that, okay, if you have teeth and you want to prevent them against cavities, then you should use a fluoridated toothpaste, right? Just use lesser, but still like pick the fluoridated one because otherwise you're not protecting against cavity.

Dr. Vivek Jogani (17:19)
fluoride is a two-edged sword.

you need to be alert when you're using a fluoridated toothpaste because we have two types of lobbies, two advocates, one school of thought is against the fluoride and one school of thought definitely supports that fluoride helps in preventing cavities. Definitely it is a proven fact that fluoride helps in preventing cavities.

But

fluoride is harmful beyond a certain dose.

So here, like I mentioned, the size of the toothpaste that you're using, the amount that you're using, can help you use a fluoridated toothpaste. Also, understand the fact that any fluoridated toothpaste, a pediatric toothpaste, is never marketed in a jumbo-sized packing. It is always available a limited pack of 28 grams, maximum 35, 40 grams, depending on the country you are in.

because an accidental ingestion of the entire tube also falls within the safely tolerated dose. So definitely you can use a fluoridated toothpaste and yes it does help in prevention of cavities.

Rinie  (18:26)
And at what point do you think we can use an adult toothpaste for a child? Because I'm guessing with the kids' fluoridated toothpaste, the PPM of fluoride would be much lesser, So at what point can you make a switch?

Dr. Vivek Jogani (18:35)
No, it's definitely the amount of fluoride available in a pediatric toothpaste is much less than what is available in an adult toothpaste. The switch to an adult toothpaste is only when the child is ready for the strong flavors. Second fact is the child has learned to well. So usually a child learns to spit by six years of age.

They master it in an adult pattern by the time they are 8 to 10 years of age. So anywhere after 10 years, 12 years of age, you can introduce an adult toothpaste to the child.

Rinie  (19:10)
it's really given good material thought for anybody watching this, including myself, on what choices to make in terms of toothbrush and toothpaste. So thank you for clarifying that. And let's talk about frequency of brushing because when you mentioned about the newborns, you said after every feed we should just take the gauze and just give it a good wipe. I think that would be a great way to desensitize them as well for when...

brushing is eventually introduced. But when you do start using a toothpaste, with, let's say, the finger brush or the tiny toothbrush, how often would you do it? What's the best time to your teeth?

Dr. Vivek Jogani (19:45)
Well, ideally you should be brushing two times a day that is in the morning and night. Night brushing is an absolute compulsion. You cannot run away with it. So night brushing under parental supervision has to be done. Morning brushing you can give the toothbrush with the toothpaste to the child for the child to himself brush whatever he can.

Now here what is important is to understand that if you have brushed in the night, there's nothing major to clean in the morning. Morning brush is just for a personal feel, a pleasant odor and know freshness. And why it is important to brush at night is because like let's say if the child is nursing on a bottle feed or the mother is nursing the baby, the entire night the milk pools around the oral cavity and you know milk has a

tendency to form a slime layer all around the tooth and once the tooth is coated with the milk and the pH of the oral cavity falls down after every feed so it gets into an acidic medium and the milk breaks down into acids and it is the acids which cause the white spot lesions or the small cavities on the teeth of the young infants and babies. So if you have brushed

at night after the feed and the child sleeps well and there's no milk layer forming on that definitely you prevent cavity formations. In older kids if you don't brush at night you have allowed the food particle to get fermented, form acids, break down on the tooth and then you're removing it in the morning. So there's no point in cleaning in the morning it's the other way around you have to get the

brushing done at night and in the morning after you have had your breakfast.

Rinie  (21:32)
After you've had your breakfast. I just want an argument with my husband because he always says that you have to brush the first thing that you wake up in the morning. And I say, what's the point? We brush right before we went to sleep. Let my teeth get dirty again. And then we use that opportunity to brush. Thank you, Dr. Jogani I owe you one for this.

Dr. Vivek Jogani (21:33)
Yeah.

a lot of people prefer to brush in early morning before having their breakfast. Most of them don't brush at night and that is why they have the urge to brush in the morning. So if you're brushed well in the night and you've slept well, definitely in the morning you'll be fresh. You can have your breakfast, brush and then leave for work, office, school, whatever.

Rinie  (22:10)
Sounds amazing.

I mentioned earlier, we are all struggling to get our child to brush their teeth because no becomes their favorite word. You want to brush your teeth? No. Can you open up your mouth? No. Can we go to the bathroom? No. And then it becomes a power struggle. So in your experience, 15 years of dealing with kids day in, day out.

What do you think are your best strategies to get a child to cooperate during brushing?

Dr. Vivek Jogani (22:34)
first thing so most parents what they do is they make the child brush and they forget that they don't brush so you have to be a role model for the child get up brush your teeth and then ask the child to brush at a tender age of two and three when you're doing that kids want to do what the parents do the

most common mistake what 80 to 90 percent of the parents in my practice I observe is maybe both the parents are not brushing or one parent brushing and then the child has an easy way out daddy is not brushing why should I?

Yeah, so first be a role model to your child You can also ask them why don't you come and brush my teeth.

Rinie  (23:14)
That's a good one. That's a good one, yeah.

Dr. Vivek Jogani (23:14)
yeah and make it a play time wherein you have a small music or a small song which runs for five minutes so till the song is running you know that you're going to brush so you don't have to time out that my child is brushing only for one minute and it's a boring brushing going to the washroom going to the bathroom taking the brush brush brush and then come out spit parent yelling don't spill water you know do this do that so

Put up a small rhyme or a music which is going to run for three to five minutes max.

you have a lot of jingles available on YouTube wherein brushing demonstrations, brushing techniques.

Be a participant, be both the parents or maybe at least one parent is there with the child while brushing. The parent himself is brushing his teeth or handing over his brush to the child to help the parent brush. So let the child take a lead of brushing the parent. In the process, they also want to do it for themselves

And then, what I usually advise parents is don't make long term goals. Have short term goals. Make a weekly goal.

Monday to Saturday on the bathroom, somewhere around on the door you put up a chart. So you put up a chart wherein it has a sun and a moon and Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday and the child ticks himself. So the child gets the authority to decide for himself.

The child takes, know, if the morning brush is done, it's the sun. If the night brush is done, the moon. And then Monday to Friday, it is done. You enjoy the Saturday. So they start counting, I've done Monday to Friday. So I can have,

field trip or a movie or a park or you know friends place So the child will look forward to a Saturday and for any reason the child is not brushed for at least three days two days make it a boring Saturday just don't do anything just a regular routine.

and they get back into that then you you reinforce the child so you cannot be forcing them the more you force them the more they retaliate.

and also the you know keep two different toothpaste. So you know this is a morning toothpaste this is a night toothpaste they like a change in color texture they like something that is new they get excited with different pencils so why not toothbrushes keep different toothbrushes.

morning different toothbrush, night different toothbrush. So instead of discarding a toothbrush in like three months, you can discard it in four months because the frequency of use is not twice a day.

And I'm sure your pediatric dentists are the ones who can teach you excellent how you can brush your

Rinie  (25:54)
all of these are just like a treasure trove of strategies that parents can use with their toddlers to encourage them to brush. Dr. Jhagani, if I go a little like earlier in their journey in terms of when they are babies, because I remember I struggled to brush my kids teeth even with the finger brush, even with the tiny brush when she was nine, 10 months old. And you can't really reason with a child that young, like under 18 of 18 months old, there's no logic.

to anything right so in that age group how would you encourage them to at least open up their mouths and kind of not be so resistant towards brushing

Dr. Vivek Jogani (26:30)
it's how you hold the child. Many times you are standing in front of the child and you're just trying to, I'm just trying to show you that, you know, we usually do this way and, you know, we don't know how much pressure we are putting in. Kids don't like it. They like to be gentle because they're just 18 months old. So either hold the baby in front of you, facing the mirror and go gentle in a massaging manner.

So to introduce the brush you have to massage with the toothbrush rather than actually brush. Once the child knows that these are motions, you know, they accept it.

Yeah, you know this one point which I wanted to add is sometimes kids have had a long day tired due to traveling or not keeping well how do you brush when the child is not well. there are times wherein we want the child to rest rather than

having a stressful time by you know just forcing brushing on them. So you can take any pediatric mouthwash. soak and dip a ear bud in the mouthwash after they have slept and gently paint the teeth. So what you're using is just

a quantity bare minimum used for painting of teeth. So there is nothing that you really have to spit it out.

And after every episode of fever, don't forget to discard your old toothbrush and introduce a new toothbrush. That is very important.

Rinie  (27:56)
Because the bacteria would stay in it otherwise, which can get reintroduced into the system.

Dr. Vivek Jogani (27:59)
So, yes, so ideally when we say is you discard your toothbrush after every three months or after any or every episode of fever.

Rinie  (28:10)
Something I never thought of, something I think nobody has really thought of and would not think of until they go and see a pediatric dentist on their regular visits because, you know, these are just such simple things.

Dr. Vivek Jogani (28:21)
Yes, very

